HTTP client span clarification (#3290)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/trace/semantic_conventions/http.md

## HTTP client

This span type represents an outbound HTTP request. There are two ways this can be achieved in an instrumentation:

1. Instrumentations SHOULD create an HTTP span for each attempt to send an HTTP request over the wire.
   In case the request is resent, the resend attempts MUST follow the [HTTP resend spec](#http-request-retries-and-redirects).
   In this case, instrumentations MUST NOT (also) emit a logical encompassing HTTP client span.

2. If for some reason it is not possible to emit a span for each send attempt (because e.g. the instrumented library does not expose hooks that would allow this),
   instrumentations MAY create an HTTP span for the top-most operation of the HTTP client.
   In this case, the `http.url` MUST be the originally requested URL, before any HTTP-redirects that may happen when executing the request.

>    The instrumentation MUST NOT set the `http.resend_count` attribute.

Author: > is this requirement necessary as the way to distinguish these two modes?

Yes, that was my initial idea.

> * request starts
> * first-time connection fails is retried by okhttp, response is 503. This is one HTTP span
> * now custom retry handler retries - this is another HTTP span.
>
> outer okhttp instrumentation has all means to set http.resend_count on both HTTP spans.

I'm not sure I understand the scenario. Assuming that this is the "lol-level" instrumentation, meaning each HTTP send attempt gets a separate span, even if there's some interceptor/retry mechanism injected into the client the spans should be accurately counted - because we instrument the actual HTTP send.
If this is a high-level instrumentation, then by definition we instrument the topmost operation - so no retries will be registered.

>    The instrumentation MUST NOT set the `http.resend_count` attribute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## HTTP client

This span type represents an outbound HTTP request. There are two ways this can be achieved in an instrumentation:

1. Instrumentations SHOULD create an HTTP span for each attempt to send an HTTP request over the wire.
   In case the request is resent, the resend attempts MUST follow the [HTTP resend spec](#http-request-retries-and-redirects).
   Instrumentations MAY emit a "logical" (encompassing) span that is a parent of all the resend attempt spans;

>    however, this span MUST NOT exhibit HTTP semantics.

Author: This is underspecified on purpose; see https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/3234#discussion_r1116201603

Reviewer: I'm wondering if this "underspecification" is needed/useful?
```suggestion
```

Reviewer: oh, or maybe
```suggestion
   In this case, instrumentations SHOULD NOT (also) emit a logical encompasing HTTP client span.
```

Author: I made it a "MUST NOT" for symmetry with option 2 ("The instrumentation MUST NOT set the `http.resend_count` attribute."), WDYT?

One problem with this statement is that it prohibits/discourages a **logical HTTP span** (which I 100% agree with), but at the same time it does not say anything about a **logical span** - not HTTP, just an empty span that'd group all the HTTP events/exceptions; and so the connection/SSL/DNS/response parsing errors remain uncaught.

Retries and redirects cause more than one physical HTTP request to be sent.
A request is resent when an HTTP client library sends more than one HTTP request to satisfy the same API call.
This may happen due to following redirects, authorization challenges, 503 Server Unavailable, network issues, or any other.

> Each time an HTTP request is resent, the `http.resend_count` attribute MUST be added to each repeated span and set to the ordinal number of the request resend attempt.

Reviewer 2: I think we should keep SHOULD. 

It can be quite difficult to do in pure HTTP client instrumentation. Essentially there is no place to store current try count. http clients and retry policies can create new instances of HTTP requests between tries, or there could be no parent context to put it to. E.g. it's not possible to guarantee this behavior with .NET HTTP client native instrumentation.
